antiquotation -> string interpolation (#7278)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/src/language/string-interpolation.md

# String interpolation

String interpolation is a language feature where a [string], [path], or [attribute name] can contain expressions enclosed in `${ }` (dollar-sign with curly brackets).

Such a string is an *interpolated string*, and an expression inside is an *interpolated expression*.

> Interpolated expressions must evaluate to something that can be coerced to a string, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interpolated expressions must evaluate to one of the following:
```

> - [string]
> - [path]
> - [derivation]

Author: Counter-proposal to [this](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/7278/files#r1039732574):
```suggestion
- a [string]
- a [path]
- a [derivation]
```

Link titles should reflect the contents, and in this case we're linking to the definition of the type, not a particular instance.

> - [string]
> - [path]
> - [derivation]
> 
> [string]: ./values.md#type-string
> [path]: ./values.md#type-path
> [attribute name]: ./values.md#attribute-set
> [derivation]: ../glossary.md#gloss-derivation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [a string](./values.md#type-string)
- [a path](./values.md#type-path)
- [a derivation](./values.md#attribute-set)
```

# String interpolation

String interpolation is a language feature where a [string], [path], or [attribute name] can contain expressions enclosed in `${ }` (dollar-sign with curly brackets).

Such a string is an *interpolated string*, and an expression inside is an *interpolated expression*.

> Interpolated expressions must evaluate to something that can be coerced to a string:

Reviewer 2: I'd add `, such as:` here at the end because the list is not exhaustive.

Author: I'd like to make the list exhaustive. What else is missing?

Reviewer 2: Most important additional thing are attribute sets with the `__toString` attribute (which is a function `self -> string`):

```
nix-repl> "${{ __toString = _: "toString"; }}"
"toString"
```

This is sometimes used to make some kind of "smart value" that has e.g. `__toString` and `__functor` to pretend to be an object or whatever.

Technically saying that `derivations` are coercible to string is also not precise, as it is all attribute sets with an `outPath` attribute:

```
nix-repl> "${{ outPath = "outPath"; }}"        
"outPath"
```

This is the behaviour for what we call "weak coercion" in Tvix (equivalent to `!coerceMore` in C++ Nix), there's slightly different behaviour for "strong coercion" but I'm pretty sure it doesn't apply to interpolation.

Author: Yes, of course. Now I remember why I didn't put it there: I wasn't sure if we want to expose this feature.

This PR was originally only to rename antiquotation to string interpolation.

In the Nix team meeting we agreed to add a glossary entry to have something to point to.

Then @edolstra asked to extract that into its own section.

I tried to keep changes minimal and preserve the contents as far as possible.

Describing what a derivation is and how it works specifically is a completely different scope, and the changes here are already a bit too much to review easily.

I'd rather postpone going into the `__toString` business to a different PR.

- [string]
- [path]
- [derivation]

[string]: ./language/values.md#type-string
[path]: ./language/values.md#type-path
[attribute name]: ./language/values.md#attribute-set
[derivation]: ../glossary.md#gloss-derivation

> When an interpolated expression evaluates to a path, and is thus coerced into a string, the path is first copied into the Nix store and the resulting string is the [store path].

Reviewer 2: "thus" is causal, but I think you want temporal relation here: "and is *then* coerced"

Author: Actually, the coercion part is irrelevant for that statement anyway.

```suggestion
When an interpolated expression evaluates to a path, the path is first copied into the Nix store and the resulting string is the [store path].
```

```

(where `freetype` is a [derivation]), you can instead write

```nix
"--with-freetype2-library=${freetype}/lib"
```

The latter is automatically translated to the former.

A more complicated example (from the Nix expression for [Qt](http://www.trolltech.com/products/qt)):

```nix
configureFlags = "
  -system-zlib -system-libpng -system-libjpeg
  ${if openglSupport then "-dlopen-opengl
    -L${mesa}/lib -I${mesa}/include
    -L${libXmu}/lib -I${libXmu}/include" else ""}
  ${if threadSupport then "-thread" else "-no-thread"}
";
```

Note that Nix expressions and strings can be arbitrarily nested;
in this case the outer string contains various interpolated expressions that themselves contain strings (e.g., `"-thread"`), some of which in turn contain interpolated expressions (e.g., `${mesa}`).

### Path

Rather than writing

```nix
./. + "/" + foo + "-" + bar + ".nix"
```

or

```nix
./. + "/${foo}-${bar}.nix"
```

you can instead write

```nix
./${foo}-${bar}.nix
```

### Attribute name

Attribute names can be created dynamically with string interpolation:

```nix
let
  names = [ "foo" "bar" "baz" ];
  attrs = map (name: { ${name} = true; }) names;
in

> builtins.foldl' (x: y: x // y) {} attrs

Reviewer 2: I think this is an unnecessarily complex example for someone just trying to understand string interpolation.

Author: Agreed. I simply couldn't come up with a simpler one on the spot. How would you demonstrate dynamic attribute names?

Reviewer 2: I think it can be completely logicless, e.g.:

```
let
  key = "keyName";
in {
  ${key} = 42;
}
```

as we're not trying to demonstrate anything else here.

# String interpolation

String interpolation is a language feature where a [string], [path], or [attribute name] can contain expressions enclosed in `${ }` (dollar-sign with curly brackets).

Such a string is an *interpolated string*, and an expression inside is an *interpolated expression*.

Interpolated expressions must evaluate to something that can be coerced to a string:

- [string]
- [path]
- [derivation]

[string]: ./language/values.md#type-string
[path]: ./language/values.md#type-path
[attribute name]: ./language/values.md#attribute-set
[derivation]: ../glossary.md#gloss-derivation

> When an interpolated expression evaluates to a path, and is thus coerced into a string, the path is first copied into the Nix store and the resulting string is
> the [store path].

Author: ```suggestion
When an interpolated expression evaluates to a path, and is thus coerced into a string, the path is first copied into the Nix store and the resulting string is the [store path].
```
